# URL Shortener System Design

- URL shorterning service that converts long URLs into shorter, manageable links

## The Approach

1. Requirements
2. Core entities
3. API or Interface
4. Data flow [more to infra-heavy systems]
   - rate limiter
   - message queue
5. High-level design
6. Deep dives

## 1. Requirements | Functional vs. Non-Functional Requirements

1. We start with the core features: **functional requirements**

- top 2-3 features
- if you don't understand the system, ask questions

### Functional requirements -> Users should be able to/can... | What the system does

User can...

- Add a link to it and get a shorter version | create a short url from a long url
  - optionally:
    - support custom alias
    - support expiration time

- Be redirected to the original from the short url

### Non-functional requirements -> The system should be... | Qualities of the system [-ities] / How the system behaves

- From the `-ities`, which are interesting for this system?
- What's the scale of this system?
  - how many users?
    - e.g. 100 million daily users (DAU) and 1 billion urls that get shortened

The system should be...

- fast in redirecting [low latency / ~200ms - human perceivable]
  - less than 200ms, humans don't perceive -> 200ms = realtime
- scale to support 100M DAU & 1B urls
- ensure uniqueness of shortcodes (even with 1B urls!)
  - no collision!
- CAP
  - When considering that network fails (partition tolerance), what's more important: consistency or availability?
  - in distributed systems, we need to have partition tolerance
  - is consistency or availability?
    - does it need strong consistency or high availability?
    - do I need strong read-after-write consistency?
    - does every single read of my system need to have the latest write?
- in the case of a URL shortener: high availability
  - it's more important that the system is available and it's fine if the data might be stale for a while
