# Replication

- Replication: keeping a copy of the same data on multiple machines that are connected via a network
  - for a long time, except in research, many developers assumed that a database consisted of only one node
  - Replication in databases started being studied in 1970, and its principles haven't changed much
  - Mainstream usage of distributed databases is more recent

Why would you want to replicate data?

- Keep data geographically close to the users -> reduces latency
- Allow system to continue working even with some faulty parts | Avoid single point of failure -> increase availability
- Scale number of machines that can serve read queries -> increase throughput

All the difficulty in replication lies in how to handle changes in the replicated data.

- If the data in one portion of the system is updated, how will the other parts know?
- There are 3 common algorithms for replicating changes across the nodes
  - single-leader
  - multileader
  - leaderless

- Should we use sync or asyn replication?
- How do we handle failed replicas?

## Scaling horizontally application servers vs. dbs

Significantly more common and easier to scale horizontally application servers than dbs

- Application servers: they are stateless, they don't hold onto user data between requests. Meaning, if you need to handle more traffic, adding another server instance is simple
  - just add them behind a load balancer, and there you have it

- Db: they are stateful. They hold the true value of data. So, if we have multiple instances, they challenge is how this data is distributed while keeping the unique truth
  - how do we copy writes from server A to server B?
  - how do we deal with conflicting data?
  - how do we ensure users don't see outdated information?

> Usually, in the industry the rule is: scale application servers horizontally (simple) early and often, but scale your db vertically for as long as possible before resorting to horizontal db
